Title: How is MIFOS run
Date: 2013-10-18
Category: i290m-ocpp
Tags: assignment3, mifos, opensource
slug: A1-StefanTian
Author: Stefan
Summary: Third Assignment

Blog post about community participation. Incorporate links to your project participation and engage the readings. Do they generalize to your experience? Or not? How?

To me, MIFOS is the perfect example of the Benevolent Dictator Model (Fogel) with maybe more dictator than benevolent. I’ve mentioned before on how MIFOS is split up into teams and each team is delegated certain tasks from their team leader. When I look at how MIFOS’s “mousetrap” is built(Shah), I can see how this model has its benefits. For example, need-driven participants get timely feedback, start discussions and have their effort noted(Shah) all by the team leaders. In my mind, the team leaders provide an almost artificial hand in giving feedback and positive reinforcement along with criticisms to create a constant loop of contributions and feedback in order to keep the contributor engaged. It’s a substitute for an active community and almost feels like a classroom setting where Teacher is patting you on the back and constantly reviewing your work. 
However, there is not as much reciprocity(Shah) or “Others helped me I should help them.” This is the trade-off with the active leadership model that MIFOS has. The projects and tasks are not as open as they could be because your first step into contributing is subscribing and getting on a particular team which has particular tasks. That extra barrier alone makes it so that really only people on your team can help you. In my task, helping write and modify the new MIFOS X User manual, this becomes almost like a race to the finish line type scenario because once someone’s done it, it’s not as common to change or modify the work done unlike coding. However, at this point, I would like to mention that my experience and exposure to MIFOS is very limited because the tasks I’ve been assigned have all been purely technical and centric to one specific team. This is inherent to MIFOS’s structure and I am thinking about applying to sit in on some of the programming teams to get a feel for their culture and see if there’s a difference in culture between the teams. If I do find it to be true, I’m going to talk to Edward Cable(Community Director/Benevolent Dictator/Head Honcho) if I could sit In on all the teams to maybe do a write up on the differences I find and possibly do some interviews. 
(Update) on my attempt to sit in on some of the programming team meetings. I talked to Edward Cable and he actually denied my request to sit in on different teams even after I told him I was a student. I did however get access to the coders mailing list on a different fake account. He didn’t elaborate too much on why he denied me access but given how the rest of MIFOS is set up, I’m not too surprised. To give an example of this, I have both a MIFOS user account and a MIFOS developer/contributor account. Each account is set up with their own privileges depending on how much you have done and what kind of account you have. When I’m logged into the User account, I cannot even access the MIFOS volunteer task lists page because it returns an “access denied” message. At this point, I believe it’s very clear that MIFOS’s philosophy is based on separation and different user abilities, controls, and etc but from the few times I have asked Edward about it, he has never really answered why. 
Personally, I believe the absence of social reciprocity would definitely inhibit the productivity and the amount of user/community participation in a typical open source project. People join open source projects to experience a sense of community while working towards a common goal that they can all benefit from. If the former aspect is removed, it just feels like I’m being tasked individually and resembles homework to a certain extent. In the case of MIFOS, I don’t even experience the benefits of my work because unlike other open source projects, where the contributors have a direct vested interest in the project’s success because they often use it themselves, MIFOS is not a software that is at all relevant to the unpaid volunteers’ uses. 
I’ve touched on this before, but because there is very little interaction between regular developers in the non-technical side, there is very little welcoming or sense of community within the non-technical contributors. The mailing list is much less vibrant and many introductions are left unanswered. However, in fairness, I personally believe many non-technical contributors browse the MIFOS Users mailing list(which is the mailing list for MIFOS software users and troubleshooting helpers) and get their sense of community from answering User’s questions. However, from looking at the technical developers mailing list from my fake account, the community acted exactly how I would assume a mailing list should act. People were asking for help and receiving it from volunteers and admins alike.  It was a fairly apparent difference in my opinion. 
What’s interesting is the motivation that MIFOS tries to sell onto its contributors. While there are positive reinforcement items like Member/Contributor of the month awards, my impression of how MIFOS motivates its contributors as well as any site visitors is through its philanthropic message. MIFOS tries to make its very technologically complicated and intricate product more relevant and reduce the levels of separation through its campaign message “Three Billion Maries.”  Marie was essentially a success story from the use of the microfinance software as she was able to start her own business through her loan and essentially made a better life for herself. MIFOS ‘s webpage has constant reminders of the social impact that its contributors and users are making. Apart from just the campaign and the promotional video which depicts the lives and plights of people that MIFOS has helped, there are numbers and depictions of how many people MIFOS has helped and in which country. This isn’t one of the reasons in Shah’s article like “puzzles, or fun, etc”.
What’s even more interesting is the fact that this social message has already been confirmed to be not enough to motivate volunteers. This subject was talked about in my previous blog post, but essentially, when MIFOS solely relied on unpaid volunteers, their endeavors completely failed because there was not enough contributors and not enough contributions to keep the site and software running smoothly. It was only after getting paid full time contributors did the site manage to function efficiently. It retains its volunteer side now as residual help. 
I attached a link to a section of the newly updated MIFOS user manual. The section that I screenshotted(through your recommendation) is the section that I contributed.

http://imgur.com/7aewlfD



