Title: MIFOS Governance
Date: 2013-10-22
Category: i290m-ocpp
Tags: assignment4, mifos, opensource
slug: A1-StefanTian
Author: Stefan
Summary: Fourth Assignment

How does your community make tough decisions? What is it's governmance model--for example, is it a benevolent dictatorship, or consensus driven? How did it get to be that way? Do you think this governance model is conducive to cooperation on your project? Are there hidden power dynamics in your project that influence decision-making but are not explicitly part of the governance model? Think critically about the social organization of your project: could you improve on it? Where possible, link to your community's policy documents and examples of community behavior.

I touched up on this in my previous blog post but MIFOS basically operates under a separated dictator model with one or two “dictators” governing each region. Each “dictator” assigns tasks and oversees the biweekly or otherwise meetings as well as arbitrate each of their respective group. However, there’s often differences in oversight and expertise between the developer community and the user community. This is because the developers mostly consist of highly technical individuals who are adept at fixing bugs and making directed features while the users are the ones who are actually utilizing the software and engaging with the clients. Therefore, the users often have suggestions on things to improve on within the software or new features to be added. They can suggest these features to the developer community and people can “vote” on which new feature for the developer community to develop next. This feature is pretty much as involved as the community gets in terms of decision making. Developers can spot and report bugs by themselves and then work on it but the vast majority of the tasks are assigned by the team leaders. 

In terms of how MIFOS got to be this way, I believe the governance structure was relatively influenced by its earlier failures experimenting in the volunteer and altruistic driven model touched upon in blog posts 2 and 3. Once that failed, I assume that MIFOS no longer believed that undriven and unguided volunteers would be enough to maintain the platform. So along with adopting paid contributors, they also tightened their governance structure.  After having been soured by the ineffectiveness of pure open source volunteerism, I think they chose to rely more on directed guidance so while I do believe this new model stifles cooperation, MIFOS has funds that create artificial cooperation from funds. 


There are hidden social dynamics within the assignment of tasks but they’re all very understandable. In my documentation team, I noticed that a couple of individuals were being repeatedly assigned to tasks when they volunteered. Upon further research, I found that these two users were very well established and one had even won contributor of the month before. This is understandable that I and a couple of other newcomers are being passed up for more veteran users but I feel like this practice could discourage new volunteers. There’s also the concept of Permissions which reinforce this habit where “Critical system activities are assigned individual permissions while those less critical are assigned group permissions. Read or view permissions are granted by default, depending on a user’s scope [link]. For example, loan officers can only view the details of those clients assigned to them.”  

I think one dramatic social change that I personally want to see in the MIFOS communities(emphasis on plural) is further and more extensive interactions between the developer and the user community. Like I enumerated before, the users know what they want and what they want to see because they spend the most time utilizing the software more than anyone else. However, they do not all have technical backgrounds, and sometimes it takes a little help for them to express what exactly, in terms of features, they would like to see added to the software. So, while the current feature request system is very nice and a step in the right direction, I believe a larger forum should be created where developers and users can interact, ask questions, and etc. 





http://mifos.org/product/features/request-new-feature

https://mifosforge.jira.com/wiki/display/RES/Community+Processes
https://mifosforge.jira.com/wiki/display/RES/Team+Collaboration
